TECHNICAL AND PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES, FOR HEALTH CARE WORKERS, ON ADOLESCENT GIRLS’ SEXUAL, AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE SERVICES.

FOREWORD,

.An estimated 60%, of Ethiopian women were under 30, with adolescent girls, aged 15–19 accounting for 26% of this group. Ethiopia has made, significant strides in the provision of adolescent, health care services. However, adolescent girls' sexual and reproductive health services are unsatisfactory in terms of continuity of care and the competency of healthcare providers. Adolescent pregnancy increased from 12% in 2012 to 13% in 2016, with 25% of those with unmet contraceptive needs. Even though the intrauterine devices are the most effective long-acting family planning method, their use has remained unchanged at 2% since 2000. Adolescent girls who were sexually active were the least likely to use IUDs and implants.

High-impact continuum of care interventions include health education and counseling, contraception counseling and services, comprehensive abortion care, and the prevention and treatment of STIs and HIV. Maternal and neonatal care, nutritional counseling for adolescents, and gender-based violence treatment and counseling will significantly reduce adolescent pregnancy and its consequences by improving primary health care services in general, while also improving universal health care for adolescent girls' health outcomes.

Despite an increase in the number of health care providers, adolescent girls' lifecycle efforts have not been realized. Recognizing this, developed technical and procedural guidelines for health care providers on sexual and reproductive health services for adolescent girls. The complete set of these guidelines will greatly assist healthcare providers in improving the quality and equity of health care services for adolescent girls. As a result, I want to emphasize that the Ministry of Health will make every effort to ensure that these guidelines are implemented in all health facilities across the country in order to improve adolescent girls' health care services, and I sincerely request that all concerned bodies work collaboratively to ensure that these guidelines are implemented.

Dereje Duguma, MD, MIH
State Minister, Ministry of Health

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The technical and procedural guidelines for the health care workers on adolescent girls were developed using related guidelines and research evidence from various recognized sources. The guidelines have undergone numerous review meetings and consultative workshops. A group of health professionals comprised of the Ministry of Health Maternal, Child Health and Nutrition directorate, Women and Youth directorate, and non-communicable case team; the Ethiopian Midwives Association; adolescent sexual and reproductive health experts; obstetricians and gynaecologists; paediatricians; and researchers were involved in the review of this guideline. The Minister of Health is grateful to all those who have contributed to the development of this technical and procedural guide, despite their highly demanding schedules.
Sincere thanks go to the MCH Directorate case team leaders who provided leadership in developing this guideline. The Ministry of Health would like to thank all of the partners, health professional associations, private organizations, and individuals who contributed to the development of these guidelines. Special thanks go to the University of South Africa for their technical and financial contributions during the guidelines' development process.
The Ministry of Health wants to express its gratitude to Professor Bethabile Lovely Dolamo of the University of South Africa for her technical contribution in the course of developing this guideline. Dr. Aster Teshome deserves special recognition for devoting so much time and energy to the development process this guideline. A word of thanks also goes to the editorial team for formatting and designing the guidelines.
The guidelines will serve as a guide for healthcare providers to implement an integrated approach to adolescent girls' sexual and reproductive health care services.
Meseret Zelalem Tadesse, MD, Pediatrician
Maternal, Child Health and Nutrition Directorate Director Ministry of Health

TECHNICAL AND PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES FOR HEALTH CARE WORKERS ON ADOLESCENT GIRLS’ SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE SERVICES

1.	INTRODUCTION
1.1	BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Sexual and Reproductive Health/SRH is a dynamic continuum of care with changing needs throughout the lifespan. Available sexual health interventions are difficult to obtain, and adolescent girls' sexual and reproductive health needs are not always recognized (WHO 2017a: 6). In Ethiopia, according to the National Adolescent and Youth Strategy (2016-2020): risky sexual practices, child marriage, early childbearing, unintended pregnancy, unsafe abortion, and STIs/HIV are identified as major SRH problems of adolescent girls (FMoH 2016b: 7). In addition, less than half of health care facilities offered adolescent sexual and reproductive health services (EPHI, FMOH & AMDD 2017c: 122).
Ethiopia's MoH hopes to reduce adolescent pregnancy rates from 12% to 3% by increasing contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR) and promoting full-time, 24-hour/7-day service provision. However, there is still a high unmet need among these groups, and Intrauterine devices and implants were the least commonly used contraception methods by sexually active adolescent girls (CSA & ICF 2016:16). The use of intrauterine devices/IUD has also remained stagnant since 2000, falling from 2% in 2016 to 1.5% in 2019; even though IUDs were the most effective long-acting family planning methods ever used (EPHI, FMOH & ICF 2019:38; CSA & ICF 2016:16; CSA & ICF 2000:55).
On the other hand, there is a significant increase in deployment of health care providers across the country whereas their potential contribution in improving the SRH needs of adolescent girls has yet to be realized. To address this issue, the MoH developed national training manuals, standards and minimum service delivery packages for SRH service delivery. However, for the continuum of care to be effective, technical and procedural guidelines on the provision of SRH services for adolescent girls across the lifecycle are required (FMoH 2017a: 1). This highlighted the significance of developing guidelines aimed specifically at improving health care providers performance in AGSRH service delivery (FMoH 2014a: 10, FMoH 2016a: 100; FMoH 2017a: 1; FMoH 2017b)

1.2	 THESE GUIDELINES ARE MEANT TO ENABLE HEALTH CARE WORKERS
The availability of guidelines on sexual and reproductive health and standards for midwives' care practices is a significant enabling factor. Health care providers should have up-to-date knowledge and in-service refresher training to improve providers-client communication. In this regard, Adolescent girls' sexual and reproductive health care guidelines are important tools for health care providers. Besides availing the technical guide, management of the facility and senior Health care providers should provide junior Health care providers with regular coaching, mentoring, and supportive supervision.
1.3	PROCESS OF GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT
The process of developing guidelines adheres to the key steps recommended by WHO (2014:8). Before drafting the guidelines, relevant literature and related guidelines were reviewed. A group of senior midwives, experts on adolescent sexual and reproductive health, and other health professionals first reviewed the draft document to reach an agreement on the content and determine its feasibility in the Ethiopian context. The researchers in the area were involved, and they incorporated the experts' feedback and finalized the development of the guidelines. The finalized guidelines will serve as a guide to implement an integrated approach to Adolescent Girls’ Sexual and Reproductive Health/AGSRH care services provided by healthcare providers.
The guideline is divided into seven sections, and the major topics include:

1.	Health promotion and SRH counseling services

2.	Contraceptive counseling and services

3.	Comprehensive abortion care

4.	Prevention and treatment of STIs/HIV

5.	Maternal and newborn health care services

6.	Adolescent nutrition

7.	Gender-based violence