TECHNICAL AND PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES, FOR HEALTH CARE WORKERS, ON ADOLESCENT GIRLS’ SEXUAL, AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE SERVICES.

FOREWORD,

.An estimated 60%, of Ethiopian women were under 30, with adolescent girls, aged 15–19 accounting for 26% of this group. Ethiopia has made, significant strides in the provision of adolescent, health care services. However, adolescent girls' sexual and reproductive health services are unsatisfactory in terms of continuity of care and the competency of healthcare providers. Adolescent pregnancy increased from 12% in 2012 to 13% in 2016, with 25% of those with unmet contraceptive needs. Even though the intrauterine devices are the most effective long-acting family planning method, their use has remained unchanged at 2% since 2000. Adolescent girls who were sexually active were the least likely to use IUDs and implants.

High-impact continuum of care interventions include health education and counseling, contraception counseling and services, comprehensive abortion care, and the prevention and treatment of STIs and HIV. Maternal and neonatal care, nutritional counseling for adolescents, and gender-based violence treatment and counseling will significantly reduce adolescent pregnancy and its consequences by improving primary health care services in general, while also improving universal health care for adolescent girls' health outcomes.

Despite an increase in the number of health care providers, adolescent girls' lifecycle efforts have not been realized. Recognizing this, developed technical and procedural guidelines for health care providers on sexual and reproductive health services for adolescent girls. The complete set of these guidelines will greatly assist healthcare providers in improving the quality and equity of health care services for adolescent girls. As a result, I want to emphasize that the Ministry of Health will make every effort to ensure that these guidelines are implemented in all health facilities across the country in order to improve adolescent girls' health care services, and I sincerely request that all concerned bodies work collaboratively to ensure that these guidelines are implemented.

Dereje Duguma, MD, MIH
State Minister, Ministry of Health

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The technical and procedural guidelines for the health care workers on adolescent girls were developed using related guidelines and research evidence from various recognized sources. The guidelines have undergone numerous review meetings and consultative workshops. A group of health professionals comprised of the Ministry of Health Maternal, Child Health and Nutrition directorate, Women and Youth directorate, and non-communicable case team; the Ethiopian Midwives Association; adolescent sexual and reproductive health experts; obstetricians and gynaecologists; paediatricians; and researchers were involved in the review of this guideline. The Minister of Health is grateful to all those who have contributed to the development of this technical and procedural guide, despite their highly demanding schedules.
Sincere thanks go to the MCH Directorate case team leaders who provided leadership in developing this guideline. The Ministry of Health would like to thank all of the partners, health professional associations, private organizations, and individuals who contributed to the development of these guidelines. Special thanks go to the University of South Africa for their technical and financial contributions during the guidelines' development process.
The Ministry of Health wants to express its gratitude to Professor Bethabile Lovely Dolamo of the University of South Africa for her technical contribution in the course of developing this guideline. Dr. Aster Teshome deserves special recognition for devoting so much time and energy to the development process this guideline. A word of thanks also goes to the editorial team for formatting and designing the guidelines.
